docs: combine client awareness and enforcement docs (#6414)
apollographql/router: docs/source/routing/observability/client-id-enforcement.mdx

---
title: Client Awareness and Enforcement
subtitle: Require client details and operation names to help monitor schema usage
description: Improve GraphQL operation monitoring by tagging operations with with client details. See code examples for Apollo GraphOS Router and Apollo Server.
published: 2022-05-31
id: TN0001
tags: [server, observability, router]
redirectFrom:
  - /technotes/TN0001-client-id-enforcement/
  - /graphos/routing/observability/client-awareness
---

> Understanding client usage is critical for maintaining an evolving GraphQL schema. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics about GraphQL schema usage are more insightful when information about clients using the schema is available.
```

As part of GraphOS Studio metrics reporting, servers can [tag reported operations with the requesting client's name and version](/graphos/metrics/client-awareness).
This **client awareness** helps graph maintainers understand which clients are using which fields in the schema.

Apollo's GraphOS Router and Apollo Server can enable client awareness by requiring metadata about requesting clients.

> The router supports client awareness by default. If the client sets the headers `apollographql-client-name` and `apollographql-client-version` in its HTTP requests, GraphOS Studio can separate the metrics and operations per client. This client name is also used by the persisted queries feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The router supports client awareness by default. If the client sets its name and version with the headers `apollographql-client-name` and `apollographql-client-version` in its HTTP requests, GraphOS Studio can separate the metrics and operations per client. This client name is also used by the persisted queries feature.
```

> Clients can (and should) [name their GraphQL operations](/react/data/operation-best-practices/#name-all-operations), which provides more context around how and where data is being used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients should [name their GraphQL operations](/react/data/operation-best-practices/#name-all-operations), which provides more context around how and where data is being used.
```

## Why enforce client reporting?

Client metadata enables better insights into schema usage, such as:

- **Identifying which clients use which fields**: This facilitates usage monitoring and safe deprecation of fields.
- **Understanding traffic patterns**: This helps optimize schema design based on real-world client behavior.
- **Improving operation-level observability**: This provides details for debugging and performance improvements.

> Apollo strongly recommends requiring client details (name and version) and operation names in all incoming GraphQL requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apollo strongly recommends requiring client name, client version, and operation names in all incoming GraphQL requests.
```

## Enforcing in GraphOS Router

The GraphOS Router supports client awareness by default if the client sets the `apollographql-client-name` and `apollographql-client-id` in their requests.
These values can be overridden using the [router configuration file](/router/managed-federation/client-awareness/) directly.
You can use a Rhai script to _enforce_ that clients include metadata.

### Customizing client awareness headers

> Different header names can be used by updating the configuration file. If those headers will be sent by a browser, they must be allowed in the [CORS (Cross Origin Resource Sharing) configuration](/router/configuration/cors), as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If headers with customized names need to be sent by a browser, they must be allowed in the [CORS (Cross Origin Resource Sharing) configuration](/router/configuration/cors), as follows:
```
